Good morning everyone, uh.
Hello Sean. Do you hear me?
Thank you Jana.
Oh nice, so we will start in two
or three minutes, just waiting
for other students to join the
class. Thank you.
Hello professor, I don't know if
you said my name or said hello to
me. I think my sound settings
were messed up. But now I
can hear you. That's fine. I did
change it myself. Thank you.
So let's start, good morning
everyone. I hope you have
A wonderful day. Actually
last night. It was the first
time it was snowing in the winter.
So happy Winter!
I didn't know that it's snowing,
so I went out for running
and then I lost my phone. I get,
I mean wet and but it was, It
was kind of fun so.
Again, happy Winter
and let's start.
Today we're going to finish
the topic about the
minimalization and we will
just start the next chapter,
which is about the
combination of logic. Just
an introduction, and next
lecture, We're going to
start and fully cover
combination of logic.
So before I start the
minimization, if you have any
question regarding the lectures
in the previous weeks, I'm ready
to take your questions.
So just to make sure that
everyone has a focus to this
slide, so please send me some
feedbacks. Make sure that
you hear my voice and
You see these slides.
Thank you Sameeksha, Nelson
Gianna, Dennis.
Taylor.
Mia yes.
Nicholas, thank you, Nicholas.
So Josh, thank you.
That's great.
When is the midterm mark available?
Actually, I understand. I mean
about only few students are left
actually, so the marks still
remains. We're going to release
the marks on November 11. I mean
next week, officially, but it's
already done. Just a few students
We have to mark, but yes, I
mean, as we promised, November
11, we are gonna release the
midterm marks, yes.
Also, we already have the key. The
key files because we had
Two versions of the exam, so
the key files for two
versions of the exam are
already available on
Blackboard, so if you go to
the exam.
There are, yeah. I mean, on top
of the link for the questions
file there are two
other files. Those are
the keys for the midterm exam,
so you can already
See what would be your mark in
case there are some,
there is issue with the marking,
you can actually anticipate
appealing your mark if there
is any inconsistency between what
you thought and the mark.
So any other questions?
So, there's no question.
Uh, just a quick recap of what
we said in last week. We started
the topic minimization and we
said that why it is important?
Cecause we wanted to reduce the
cost and also some other factors
such as, I mean the area of the circuit,
you want to minimize the area of
circuit sometimes because of the
limitation in the practice. So
Minimalization was important, so
we introduced two methods. One
was using the Boolean algebra or
algebraically manipulate the
Boolean expression in order to
reduce the number of binary
variables and this also means
that the number of input in the
logic gate, also reducing the
number of gates.
But we said that using the
Boolean algebra is kind of hard
because you have to be smart,
because of the guesswork in the
process. So you have to be
careful where and what postulate
that you have to apply in order
to minimize the Boolean
expression. An important thing
was that when the number of
binary variables increases to 5, 6
variables and the number of
minterms or maxterms grows
for instance to 10 or 15.
It's hard to keep track of the
binary variables in the minterms
or maxterms and then use the
distributive postulate and other
I mean postulates in the Boolean
algebra. And the most important
one is that at the end of
the day, when you use the Boolean
algebra, you're not sure that the
final expression is the minimum
one or not, because sometimes you
might forget some postulate to
apply, so you're not sure that
The answer is the minimized form
of the Boolean expression.
Because of that we introduced
a 2nd method, which was
based on the idea proposed by
Maurice Karnaugh, actually he
proposed a tabular or
pictorial or graphical
manipulation of the Boolean
expression. So it's called the
map, he published his work on a
paper called the Map Method.
After him we call this map
Karnaugh map or K-map and 2
interesting properties of this
method is that first of all,
it's kind of an algorithm, so
you have to follow some defined
steps in order to minimize the
Boolean expression and the most
important one is that the result
is guaranteed to be minimal,
so when you apply the map
method correctly, so you are
sure that the final Boolean
expression is the minimized
version of the Boolean
expression.
So we introduced the map method.
The map of this basically based
on different representation of
the truth table. We said that
we already know that the
Boolean expression can be
represented by sum of minterms and
product of maxterms. At the end
we can represent the Boolean
expression as a logic circuit or
a circuit. But as I said Karnaugh
in this paper, the map
method, proposed this
tutorial on some representation of
the truth table in order to
minimize the Boolean expression.
So the map method between
one variable, one binary variable
input is simply the same. No big
difference between the truth
table and the Karnaugh map, but for
the two variable, this is the way
we represent the two variable
Karnaugh map. And as I said, the
order of putting the minterms in
the K-Map or Karnaugh map
is important.
Uh, just for your information,
there is another Karnaugh map with
different organization of minterms,
but for the sake of I mean
consistency in the book, we use this
arrangement of the minterms in
the Karnaugh map but remember the
order of terms in the Karnaugh map
actually matters. So basically.
For the two variables we put X
here, either zero and one, and
we put Y in this part and
then either
zero or one. Based on this order
of getting X&Y, minterm 0 is gonna be
here because X is zero, Y is
zero and minterm one is gonna be
here, minterm two, and minterm three,
and this is the order of putting
the minterms in the Karnaugh map
for two variables.
We are actually explain some
examples on how to represent the
Boolean expression using the
Karnaugh map and we showed that how a
Karnaugh map actually makes it easy
to simplify a Boolean
expression. Compare the Boolean
algebra postulates, applying
the Boolean postulates. In
order to minimize the form, or
using the adjustment cells
happening in the Karnaugh map
to minimize the Boolean
expression. For instance in this
example, you see that the Boolean
function is minterm one and
three. So in order to minimize
it, you have to
use Boolean algebra. You have to
apply the distributive
postulate, extract X and then use
complement postulate. But using
the Karnaugh map, we simply say that
because these two are
adjacent, they create a region
of two minterms where all are one, so in
this region, X must be one and it
doesn't matter for Y, because
in this region,
y can be zero or one,
so we can simply drop
the Y binary variable.
Other examples and we said that
one beauty of the Karnaugh map is
that you can create overlapping
regions, for instance, in this
example you have a two regions
with Minterm one, but,
You can create this or two
overlapping regions to minimize
the Boolean expression. If you
wanted to do the same with the
Boolean postulates, you have to
be a little bit smart and
repeat one term because any
term OR by itself is the same.
So you have to for instance, repeat
this term again and then kind of
produce a new Boolean
expression. And then apply the
distributive postulate to extract.
Y' on these terms and
then by adding this term
you have to extract X-bar and
then etc. But in the two
variable Karnaugh map, you can
simply just create two
overlapping regions. The first
one is here in this region. Y
must be 0 and X doesn't matter.
And in this region,
X must be 0 and value of Y
doesn't matter, so
by two steps, you can
simply reduce the Boolean
expression.
This is another I mean
trivial example. If the
Boolean expression are all
one for all the minterms. So,
again applying the Boolean
postulates is kind of hard, but
using the two variable Karnaugh map,
we can simply create a
region of four minterms. 1
interesting thing about the
Karnaugh map is that, these
regions, these adjusting
regions are basically
Based on the powers of two, so
the regions you create are
either a region of one element,
a region of two Elements, a region of 4
elements, and later we will see that
you can create a region of 8
elements and etc. So when you
create a region of two to the
power of I elements, you are
trying to reduce the term in
order to delete I binary
variables, for instance here, to
create the region of
2 to the power of two elements:
Four elements, so you're kind of
reducing and minimizing the
Boolean expression by removing
two binary variables.
So here you are removing X&Y.
And you saw that. We said that
whenever in the Karnaugh map you
have a diagonal region
not adjacent to each other,
it kind of gives you a hint that
cannot simplify the Boolean
expression anymore. So this is a
easy way to see if you can minimize
the Boolean expression or not.
But given the truth table and
Boolean algebra, you might not
be sure that there is a way to
minimize a Boolean expression.
Actually, later in the
lecture assignment, I
will put it here:
What is the pattern of the
diagonal region in the
Karnaugh map? It is kind of,
it behaves or acts
likes XOR gates, which is
called an odd
functions. We will explain
this in a lecture
assignment this way.
Ah, then we move to the three
variables. So by attaching 2 two
variable Karnaugh map, you can
create a three variable Karnaugh
map and again, the order matters.
You put the X&Y, the first 2
binary variables here. They're
00, 01, and then 10
and 11.
And the Z comes here,
either zero or one. So based
on this arrangement,
arrangement of the binary
variables, this is the order
of minterms.
0 1 and then goes here,
2 3, goes here, 4 5,
and then 6, 7.
Based on this arrangement, area
for binary variables are either in
the normal form or in the
complement form. For
instance, for Z, first row
is in the complement form, the
2nd row is the normal form. For
the Y, the right side is the
normal form. The left Side is
the complement form.
This region of Y
must be always 0.
For the X, the middle part of
the table is in the normal form
of the binary variable X, because
in this region, X is always
one. But for the compliment form
of X, we said that the corner
map is not just a I mean.
flat metal table.
It's kind of in reality, I
mean in the formulation, it's
a kind of continuous
surface. So basically it's a
row, so these two edges in
fact are connected with each
other. Also these two edges.
This and this are also
connected with each other.
We will see in the four variable
Karnaugh map, so basically the
left side and right side of
the Karnaugh map is connected
with each other. So the X-bar
or compliment form of the X is
this region.
m0 m4 m2 and m6, so we can
consider these regions
continuous or adjacent.
So we put some examples, for
instance, in this example, as you
can see it creates this Boolean
expression here that is kind of
hard to use the Boolean
postulates to minimize it. But,
Using the Karnaugh map, you can
simply create one region here.
And, uh, in this region the
value of X&Y doesn't matter.
Only thing that matters is the Z,
which must be 0 and
then after that applying the not,
so it's the complement form of Z
In order to make the F = one.
And then the next region is gonna
be here. As we said, you can
create a overlap region.
So you have two regions, one where Z must
be zero and in another one the
value of Z doesn't matter. Also
the value of X doesn't matter
because X is either 0 or 1, but the
value of Y matter. So Y must
be one. So Y happens in the
normal form in this region, and
Z happens in the complement
form in this region.
So this is the minimized
Boolean expression. That
is two steps.
We said that you can write the
Boolean function using the
Karnaugh map based on the product
of maxterms. So using the I mean
design principle we already
know, we can look at those
entries of zero and then write the
product of maxterms. So again it
becomes like this and then you
have to using Boolean expression
and using the Boolean postulates,
you have to be careful what
Boolean postulate you have to
apply to minimize it.
But if you are given
the two variable Karnaugh map, you
can simply assume that instead
of writing the Boolean function
for those entries with one, you
can write the Boolean function
for those entries with zero,
but this time for F prime. So we
can simply assume that these
regions are one and the other
regions are zero and then write
the Boolean function for F
prime. So when you simplify the
F prime, you can apply another
not on top of the F prime, so F
prime prime becomes F.
So this is the minimize form of the F
prime. So in this region Z must
be one. And Y must be 0.
But the value of X doesn't
matter because X is either one
or zero in this region.
So this is the minimized form of
the F prime, so you have to
apply another not, so ZY' bar.
Bar becomes the F, so if you
apply the De Morgan's postulate, let's
so (ZY')' becomes Z' + Y. This
this is the way we use the
Karnaugh map to write the minimized
form of a Boolean function. But this time
using the entries with zero or
product of Maxterms.
So you can see that the Karnaugh
map is able not only to
minimize the sum of products,
but also it is able to
minimize the product of sums.
So this is the summary. The left
side is the Boolean expression
and we wanted to apply the
Boolean postulates to minimize
it. But in the right side you
have two Karnaugh maps. One is the
sum of products to minimize it. And one is
for the product of Maxterms.
But again, as you can see
here, the final result is the
same in both
Approaches.
So this is another example of,
for instance, if you're given
this Boolean function, so again,
it's hard to minimize
this Boolean function
using the Boolean postulates, but
here, using the Karnaugh map,
this is the minterm 0.
Minterm one is 0 and
then 0 1 2 3. So the minterm two
is gonna be one, and then 4 5 6 7. So
base on this arrangement of
minterms, you just put the
minterms with value one in the Karnaugh map.
So again here if you are going
to create the adjacent cells and
create a regions or groups of
minterms,  those with
the value one in the
cell. As I said, Karnaugh map is
a kind of continuous
surface, so the left and right
side is attached. At first you
could create two regions, one
region here and one region here.
So each of them actually removes
one binary variable.
But you can create a region with
four cells.
Uh, and then because four is 2
to the power of two, it removes
two binary variables. So in this
region, as you can see here, the
value of Z doesn't matter,
because in this region Z is either
one or zero.
And the value of U doesn't
matter, because again, in this
region, in this green region, Y
is either 0 or either one. The only
variable, which must actually
matters is the value of X, so X
must be 0 in this region, so we
have to say that F is equal to
the complement form of X,
because whenever X is zero,
X bar gonna be 1.
This is the way you minimize
this function. Again, you could
say that I just wanted to
consider the Maxterm, so just
those entries that makes the
Boolean function 0. So with this
one, with the Karnaugh map, you can
create a a region of 4 adjacent
elements. We apply bar for the F bar,
so that's why you just put the
final not here and then you try
to minimize inside the
parenthesis. Inside the
parenthesis, if you assume that
this is for F bar, all these
entries becomes one.
And all the other entries with
value one becomes 0. So then you
can simplify this region, this
region is when the X is gonna be 1.
So you put X here. This
is the minimize form for F bar.
For F prime. So you apply
another not to make it
F, so it becomes X-bar. So
the same as the previous one.
Oh, one thing here is that it
must be F(Z,Y,X) so it's
of three variables instead of two.
So there's a MISTAKE here.
I'll fix it when I posted,
when I gotta post it
in Blackboard. OK next,
let's move on to the next
Karnaugh map, which is a four
variable Karnaugh map.
So let's move on to the
next slides.
So if there is any question
I'm ready to take your
questions so far.
Let me close this one.
Any questions?
OK, that's OK.
Enable the laser pointer.
Nice.
So the next Karnaugh map is going
to be a Karnaugh map for four variables.
So for the 4 variables, this
is the Karnaugh Map, so the first
2 variables goes in the column
side, so X&Y and again, pay
attention to the order. So here
is the value of Y. Here is the
value of X. So 00 01.
And then comes here 10 11. 11
means that the value of X is
1 and the value of Y is 1. And the
other, the next two variables
comes here, WZ, so then
00 01 and then comes here
11 10. So this is the
arrangement 00 01 and then
goes here, 10 and then 11.
And based on this arrangement,
I mean allocation of the
minterms, it is going to be like
this.
So as you can see here, the 1st
two rows are the same as the
Karnaugh with three variables, so
minterm 0 1 and then comes here 2
3 and then comes here 4 5 and then
comes here 6 7. And then it
goes to the
Other side, so the other two rows is
going to be here, so it starts
with here with 8 9 and then
10 11, comes here, 12 13, and then
goes here for 14 15 so it ends
in this cell, where all the
variables are one. So in the m15
all the variables XY is gonna
be 1. And then Z and W are
gonna be 1.
As I said, there is another
Karnaugh maps with different arrangement
of minterms, but again the order
of the minterms always matter, so
you cannot simply say that you
can put in minterms as you wish
and then simplify the
Boolean expression. That's
incorrect, so you have to
follow a specific order of the
minterms in the Karnaugh map.
So let's practice on the four
variable Karnaugh map. Imagine
you're given this Boolean
function XYZW and these are,
this Boolean function is
equal to minterm 0, 1 up until
14. So again, imagine you were
supposed to apply the Boolean
postulates. So there are lots of
minterms here and there are four
variables, so it's kind of hard to
use the Boolean algebra or
algebraic methods to minimize this Boolean
function. WE are using this 4
variable Karnaugh map, so you can
simply just put the entries with
one for those minterms in the
question, so the minterm 0, 1, 2, etc.
So this minterm is gonna be 1.
And other minterms gonna be 0.
And then using this
pictorial
I mean map, or pictorial table
can simply create some regions
with adjacent cells to
minimize the Boolean expression.
So the first is gonna be here.
So as you can see here, you can
create a region of eight cells
adjacent to each other. So
eight is 2 to the power of
three. So you are going to
remove three binary variables.
So in this area, you can see that
the value of W doesn't matter,
because in those, in this area.
Z is either 0 or 1, W is either
0 or 1, so you can simply remove
these two and then again in this
area, the value of X doesn't
matter, so X is either
zero or one. So the only thing tjat
matters is the value of Y. So
Y is gonna be 0 in this
region, so you have to apply the
Y bar here. So this is a MISTAKE
here. So let's fix this.
THIS MUST BE Y-BAR.
Sorry about that.
Save it and then
broadcast the changes.
Yeah.
So here the value of Y must
be 0, so Y bar in the
complement form. The next region is
Gonna be, we have to create
regions to cover all the
minterms with value one, so the
next region is these 3 ones. So if you
attempt to create a region with
three elements, again it's kind
of incorrect and I'll
say why. But remember when you see adjacent
cells in the Karnaugh map, you
have to create adjacent cells based on
the powers
of two. So here, 3 is not a
power of two, so it's kind of
incorrect, and the reason is in
this region, although the value
of Z doesn't matter because in this
region, Z is either zero or one,
but the value of W.
The value of W actually matters
because you cannot simply in
this region, 1 region, the value
of 1 in these two values of W is
0. But in this region, the value
of W is 1, but there is another
cell that the value of W is also
one. So you cannot simply
say in this region the
value of W doesn't matter
because you didn't include
this cell you didn't include
this cell. This cell, the
the value of W is 0, it is not
one, so you cannot reduce
this region with the binary
variables, only X&Y, and you
just drop the W.
So we have to fix this. In order
to fix it, we can create
this region. In this
region, the value of X
doesn't matter, it is either 0 or 1.
The value of X must be 0 and the
value of W must be one, so it
becomes W X-bar.
And then
X-bar
Y, because the value Y is 1
and then W bar because the value
of W must be zero and this is
the minimized term.
And the other cell is this.
Only this cell. It cannot be used
to create
a new I mean region with other
adjacent cells. But remember for
this one because it's only one,
you have to include all the
variables. In this cell, X must
be 0. Y must be one.
Z must be
One and W must be one.
So WZYX but again, as I said in
the Karnaugh map, you can create
overlapping regions, so you can
simply create a new region, this
one with this cell.
So when you do that, you can
simply drop the value of W
because in this region, the value
of W is either zero or one.
So this is the
minimized version, so you can
simply drop the W by
overlapping regions and
another thing is that, you get
another overlapping region.
Here, for these two we create
one region. But we can say that
this is a continuous.
Uh.
Continuous maps, so
the right edge and the left edge
is connected with each other. So
you can say that this one and
these cells, all these cells are
adjacent to these cells. So for
these ones with value one, you
can simply say that these two
and these two in the left is
creating a new adjacent
region. So then in this region
the value of
W doesn't matter because in
this region the value of Y is
either one or zero.
The only thing that matters is the
value of X here because X
must be zero and for the Z&W,
the value of Z doesn't matter
because in this region, the
value of Z is either 0 or 1 but
the value of W matters
because it must be 0.
So by creating a new region of
four cells, 2 to the power of
two, so you can simply drop two
binary variables and those two
binary variables are Y&Z.
Also, for this one, for
these two you can say that these
two is adjacent to these two.
So you can simply create a new
region here, this one and this
one, and then in this region if
you check, the values of X&Z only
matters because X must be 0.
And Z must be one and the
other two variables, Y&W
doesn't matter.
And
this is the simplified Boolean
expression and this is the logic
circuit. Again, there's a TYPO
here. Y must be Y-bar. So I
have to add a not operator here.
One thing is that you might see
a logic circuits like this. I
mean with this slash here.
Ah, as you can see here in this
logic circuit, we have a wire for
X, Y, Z&W. But we don't have any
wire for a not, we don't
have a wire for X-bar.
We don't have wire for
that. Sometimes it makes it very
I mean confusing. If you add
more wires, so another way to
show not is this, you can
simply just add a slash here,
meaning that Y reflects, so it's a kind
of not. And then it becomes
Y-bar. For instance, here we have X
slash, which means X-bar. So, I
mean adding a slash on top of
wire is kind of.
Not kind of. I mean, it
tries to show semantically,
there's a not gate here.
Ah.
One thing I just wanted to show
you is this just to
Show you that.
Uh.
Oh in the next few slides
I'm going to show you this.
So let's minimize the
Boolean expression
By using the product of Maxterms.
So again, for the product of
maxterms, you will look for those
cells with zero or entries of 0,
that makes the Boolean function
zero in the output.
So these are the regions, so 1
region and this is the second
region that makes the Boolean
function 0. So you could simply
say assume that you are trying
to minimize the Boolean function
for F prime or F bar.
And then minimize it using the
Karnaugh Map, so for using this
you could simply just assume
that You're minimizing
for the F bar.
And this region simplifies
the Boolean expression by
removing because it has four
elements, so 2 to the power of
two, it removes two binary variables and
those variables are this, so in
this region, X must be one.
Y must be one and the values
of Z&W doesn't matter, so it
drops the W and Z.
But followed by not.
X&Y not so it's kind of. I
mean meaning that it becomes one
for the F bar and the next region
is this region.
So for this reason, you could
assume that this region is 1 and
then simplify it and then
followed by the not, so for this
region, the simplified version is,
because the value of X doesn't
matter because X is either zero
or one in this region.
The only thing matters is the
value is. Ah sorry YZ&W. So
in this region W must be one, Z
must be 0 and Y must be one
followed by not.
So and then you can bring the
not inside the parenthesis and
it becomes by the De Morgan's law,
it becomes Y prime or X prime
for the first parenthesis. For
the next one it is Y prime.
Or sorry, W prime
or Z or Y prime.
So this is the way you can use
the Karnaugh map to minimize the
Boolean expression using the
product of the Maxterms.
Ah, one thing I just wanted
to show you is this. In order
to just show you that what I
mean when I say the Karnaugh
map is a continuous surface.
So if you go to this link
and then play that, let me
go to that link.
This is from the
Wikipedia page, so.
We're here.
It's kind of an animation
that shows how we create a
continuous.
Surface by using
the Karnaugh map so.
This is, I mean attaching the
two edges of the Karnaugh map and
then make a torus out of that.
So again, I mean a flat surface.
The edges are these two edges
are connected. Make your role
and then these edges also
connected. Make it torus.
So you can find this in the
Wikipedia, so again the surface
roll and then a tarus.
So that's what I mean when
I say that the Karnaugh map
is continuous surface.
So let's move on to.
The next slide so.
by this I mean? I mean, uh,
when you. Assume that the Karnaugh
map is the continuous surface.
Corner of the Karnaugh map. As you
can see here. So this edge is
connected to this edge also.
This edge is connected to this,
so as a result the corner of the
Karnaugh map in the full variable
Karnaugh map is adjacent to each
other. So is I mean dots
showing the corner of the Karnaugh
mapping for variable column?
So whenever you see I mean one
in these areas in the corner
of the Karnaugh map and create a
adjustment region. Or you can
create the shared region with
adjustment cells.
So whenever you see a min term 0 2.
8 and 10 Create a
a shared region with
adjacent cells.
And this shared region the value
of X must be 0.
The value of y doesn't matter.
The reason is y is either one
or zero in this area in these
cells. The value of a W doesn't
matter because in this region
the value of W is either one or
zero. But the value of Z
must be 0.
So as a result, this region.
Is Z' X'?
So remember these corners that
you can attach the corners to
each other to create a.
A shared region.
Also I mean by using the product
of the Max terms and here as you
can see product of the Max
terms, so it becomes max terms 1 3.
For , five and etc. As
you can see here, 3 2 5 an etc. So
again, I mean by using the
product of max term .2 overlapping
I mean region one. Is this an
one is this.
So this is the area X must be
one, and this is the area.
Z must be one other variables
doesn't matter and then apply
the nots. So you can see at
the end of the the final result
for the product of maxterms
same. As the sum
of the products.
Ah.
Any question?
So we are done with the
four variable.
Karnaugh map and we see that or
whatever shared. I mean regions
an again remember whenever you
create a shared region you have
to create a shared region with
adjustment cells 2 to the power
of I, I mean powers of two.
And then by that you are
simplifying the Boolean term or
other max term or minterm dropping
i variables if it is 2 to
the power of I ,R cells.
Any questions so far?
So it's not good to not have any
questions, so. Custom again,
anybody? I mean, send some
feedback that I can make
sure that you are listening
to the lecture.
We have 40 students in
the class right now.
Mustafar Marco Josh thank you at
Omaha Mia. Thank you.
You found someone, Dennis?
So it seems everybody has the
focus to this slide.
Thank you Billy.
Thank you again, so now I'm
going to practice on our one
of our example that we saw in
previous weeks.
You already saw that we could
design A logic circuit that
tells us whether they given 2
binary numbers X&Y and we wanted
to say that whether X is greater
equal than Y or not.
Uh, we called this magnitude
comparator or I mean kind of
binary comparator. Later we'll
see another design of this
question. Uh, we said that we
can solve this by just applying
the subtraction on two unsigned
integers, but we don't know how
to so so far we don't know how
to design A subtractor by logic
gates. But let's, uh, we
designed this by just simply
using the truth table.
So, and that was the truth
table, we said that if the two
binary numbers are just in the
range of zero and three. So we
allocate two binary variables
for the first number X1 and X2,
the other two binary variables
to the Y. So Y1 and Y2 is for
the second binary digit, and we
said that based on this
allocation for the Boolean
function gonna be one in these.
In minterms. 'cause in these
minterms are zero is greater
equal than 0,1 is greater, equal
than zero and etc.
I already saw this.
And we said that we can write
this by some of minterms by
those entries makes one or
product of maxterms by those
entries. That makes the zero.
And then we design A the
logic circuit based on the
product of Maxterms and the
reason was that it had.
less number of gates and the.
gates have less number of inputs.
We already saw this, but today
let's minimize this Boolean
function and see. The minimize
form of the Boolean function
either in the Max term or in
min term for they have the
same number of gates or
different number of gates.
So here is the Boolean function
in terms of sum of minterms, an
product of the Max terms
and these are the answers in the
four variable Karnaugh map that
makes the output one, and these are
the areas that makes the output zero.
So again, X1 and X2, the first 2
variable goes in the column
side. And the Y1 and Y2
goes to the row side of
the Karnaugh map and then based on
this I mean arrangement.
We have these minterms.
So it is following the same
order in the truth Table X
one X2 Y1 Y2, so X1 and X2 goes
to the outside. Y1 Y2 goes to
the row side.
And then let's minimize,
like the sum of min terms. So
for the sum of minterms,
first region is here.
gates four adjacent cells with
value 1. And in this region
value of X1 and X2 doesn't
matter because they are either
0 or 1. Only thing matters is the
value of Y one and Y two
which must be 0. So they are both
in the component form. So y
prime 1A Y prime 2?
The next region gonna be
this region.
So in this region, the value of
Y1 and Y2 doesn't matter, but
the value of X1 and X2 matters
both be in the normal form 1 1.
The next region, so the next
region going to be this single
one, but we said that we can
create the shared region.
So can spread the shared region.
I mean covering this one with
other ones in adjacent cells. So
here we can have a regional four
adjacent cells in this region
value of X1 1.
The value of X2 doesn't matter.
Value of XY1 doesn't matter
because it is either zero or one
value of Y2 must be 0.
So this region 2 to the power 2
drops two variables and those
two variables are, uh, X2 and
Y1, so there are many variables
or this next one in this region,
X1 must be one and Y prime 2
'cause in this region y2 is 0.
And the other adjacents as
remaining is either this one and
this one. OK, so let's create
another shared region covered
this. minterm so again in this
region. The value of
X1 doesn't matter.
Also, the value of Y1 doesn't
matter and the other two
variables. The X2 must be one
and Y2 must be 0.
y two must be 0 and then
followed by not X2 must be one.
And this is the last cell you
have to cover to cover this. We
could we could cover this one
with the shared region here.
What we can say? Uh, this edge
is connected with this edge.
So we can create a shared
region. With the cells on top.
So here for we created shared region
to cover this. So in this area value
of X1 doesn't matter because
either 0 1. The value X2 must be
one. X2 one and the
value of Y1 must be 0
in this green region.
So when it is zero it it is
gonna be followed by nots in
order to make it 1 and the value
of Y2 doesn't matter because Y
two is either 0 or.
So this is the simplified
version by using the four
variable Karnaugh map.
Uh, one thing is that.
Sometimes you said that, so it's
kind of confusing X one X2 Y1 Y2
in one of the lecture
assignments for the previous
week I said that I mean.
In naming of the variable
doesn't matter, but as long as
you pick a name you have to
follow that naming. I mean
through the whole logics circuit
design, so you cannot say that.
I mean at first X one is the
value goes here and then when
you design it in the logic
circuit, change the X1 to
another variable for instance X2 or
for instance A B C. So at first
you pick your variable names.
And then finally you have to
follow the same naming up to the
end of the logic circuit.
But sometimes you are given a a
binary variables in the question
that might be confusing.
Because you something called
change of variable, you already
saw this in the map. The
discrete math also in the.
Ah. In the calculus.
Toast, you can simply rename the
binary binary variables to a new
names, but when you do that, you
follow this up until the end.
For instance, here I said that
let's assume X one is X, X2 is
Y, Y one is Z&, Y two is W.
So based on this change of
variables, I can rewrite
this Boolean function.
Like this FX because X one is x
Y, X2 becomes Y Y, one become Z&Y
to become that. So this same
actually follows for all the
variables and then in the Karnaugh
map. As we said, the first 2
variable goes to the column side
and the other two variables goes
to the row side. So the same
change happens in the Karnaugh
map, so X1 becomes X, X2 becomes
Y. XY1 becomes Z and y two
become W so? This change
propagates all the other
places, not just some places
and not other place.
So for the.
So when you did this change of
variables, so it makes it, I
mean it makes life easier
because just removing this
indices so we have a Boolean new
Boolean function XYZW and in
order to minimize this based on
the Max terms in the Karnaugh map,
you have to consider those
regions with the value 0.
So then followed by the nots.
So it's kind of writing
the minimized form for
the F bar followed by the
not, which becomes F.
So the first one is here.
In this region, the minimize
form is in this region X must. X
doesn't matter because it's
either one or zero, Y must be 0.
And W must be one. Z is either
one or zero, so we can drop Z
and X. So the reason is y bar
W. Or
this zero we have to create a
region about this so we can
create an overlapping region in
this region X must be 0, Y must
be 0. Z must be 0, but W
doesn't matter.
This is the min term for
this region.
And then there's one single zero
here, so we can create a new
term here. Or we can create it
overlap region. This edge is
connected to this edge, so we
can create a shared region.
This one with this one. So in
this shared region X must be 0.
y doesn't matter? Because y
is either one and zero or the OR
0? Z must be one, and
W must be one so W Z X' the
whole expression is 4 F bar.
Followed by nots,
this becomes F.
So if we bring the not final,
not inside the parentheses by
the De Morgans law changes the
order with and.
And did not goes on top of
each term and then again
another De Morgan if he
brings the inside the
parenthesis so it becomes
W' y then and
becomes or
Again, this is not the
inside the parenthesis
and becomes this and etc.
So this is the way we simplified
the same Boolean function by
using the Max terms by change of
the variable. So now we can
compare these two designs. This
one has. One or here.
One or here and one or here.
So three or.
And one final and.
This, this, this and so one and
three or. Product of an
max term. When we minimize it.
But this one is the minimized
form of the sum of products, so
one and here one, and here one,
and here one. And here an
this one so 12345 AND and one
final OR. So again, even after
simplifying the sum of products
and product of the Max terms
using the Karnaugh map for this
question again, we see that the
product of the max terms has less
number of gates.
So again, uh, the designing
the logic circuit is on the
product of the max term is
more efficient.
So any questions so far?
So there's no questions, so the
next is after four variable.
Let's have five variable Karnaugh map.
Yes. There was a question
that I was messaged earlier.
It was back a couple slides.
It was asking why does each
X&Y have two levels?
Why each of the X&Y? What? Why
does each X&Y have two levels?
2 levels are like X2 X1 and Y2 Y
one. Yeah oh, I see here.
When you come back here to this
one, the reason is that I mean
we we practiced this example. I
mean, last week we said that. I
mean we are given two binary
numbers. Just wanted to compare
them. So binary numbers X&Y and
we said that question usually
says that what is the range of
the input number? Said that,
assume X&Y are in the range of
023 so X, is either 0.
Other one, either 2, either 3 to
X&Y are in these ranges.
Also, y is within the
range of zero and three so the
given numbers to the circuit
is either 0123, but they said
that we have to convert these
numbers into binary system. So
if you convert the 0123 to one
it becomes 00011011.
Is for act, but why the
same? So it becomes either
00011011. So these are the
inputs the circuits so.
0010011011 for the X and for
the widest and but The thing
is we have to create some
binary variables for the first
number X and the second number
Y. For the two binary variables
of the X, we pick a name X 1
and X2 U can pick a name A,B you
could pick a name. For instance.
I don't know, for instance, WZ.
For the two binary digital of
the Y, we picked the name Y1 Y2
just the name. You could use
name, CD or we could use the
name another. I mean X one X2.
So the naming actually just
optional, but The thing is we
use the X1 and X2 just to show
you that these two binary digits
are for the input binary number
X. And Y1 Y2 is the
binary digit for the inputted
binary number Y.
Sorry about that.
So that's why I think X1 and
X2. As for the X and Y1 Y2
for the Y just the name, so you
could use a AB for X CD for Y.
Actually, we did here. As I
said, in this change of variable
you could say that for the first
2 digits of the input number X
we could use the name XY and for
this second number Y i mean a
small Y. We could use the binary
name binary variable names Z&W.
just a name
but The thing is why we allocate
2 digits because we said that
the input number X gonna be in
the range of zero and three and
zero and three is 00011.
Zero and one one so.
For representing numbers within
the range of 0 until three, we
need 2 binary digits.
So binary X1 and X2, but the
same for the Y.
So I hope I answered this
question, so let's move on to
the five variable Karnaugh map.
This is the five variable
Karnaugh map. Actually I use
an image in the Internet.
Basically, for the five
variable Karnaugh we have to grid
2 four valuable Karnaugh map.
This is the one.
First one and this is the second
one and. The first one.
As you can see, we have 5 binary
variables ABCDE. OK, so as you
can see here, imagine you don't
have any A, so you have four
variables BCDE. So this is the
column side and this is the
row side for the OK.
Now in this part you could say
that we have another fifth
variable with the value 0.
You can have another for
variable Karnaugh BCDE the same,
but with the 5th value binary
variable with equal to 1.
So we kind of, I mean two level
4 variable Karnaugh in the first
level, the 5th variable is
always zero. In the second level
the 5th variable is 1.
And then in order to share the
region I mean shared region of
the Karnaugh by adjacent
cells not only you have to
consider the adjacent cells in
its surface, but also you have
to assume that this surface is
attached to this surface. So
it's kind of a cube. So you
have to consider a continuous
surface.
With a cubic structure.
So you might think that I mean
it's become very complicated as
you can see here, for instance,
this cell here and this cell
here create a shared region.
Uh, in the value of a doesn't
matter, but the value of this
says the BC the C must be 0 b must be
one. And then E must be zero,
and D must be 0. So this is a
shared area that I mean drops
the A. But again as you can see
here, it becomes very
complicated. Although it is
pictorial, but the picture is
itself is very confusing.
That's why that we usually use
the Karnaugh map up until four
variable, because it's easy to
show. And easier to minimize the
Boolean expression, but then it
goes to the fifth variable 6
variable Karnaugh map. It becomes
very complicated. The picture it
becomes very confusing.
So for the n variable, we
don't use the Karnaugh map
anymore. In general, if N is
greater than 4.
However, there is an
algorithm. This is kind of
again, I mean, I mean, this
sounds algorithmic way.
Minimize any variable Boolean
function which is called Queen
McCluskey algorithm. Actually
if you go to this link in
Wikipedia Queen was another, I
mean individual maintain and
math classes or two computer
scientists and mathematicians.
They both independently
proposed an algorithm that
they were not aware of.
So they proposed algorithm which
are the same.
Call after them we call him
McCluskey in 1956 and later,
when we when these scientists
actually analyze this algorithm,
they figured that actually the
algorithm is already proposed in
1952 and after that they figured
out this algorithm. The
foundation of the algorithm is
already proposed in 78 much much
later than the.
Design of the logic circuit. So
as you can see, the Boolean
algebra proposed by the george
was 18. 40 50 something so after
him after introducing Boolean
algebra before Huntington in
1905 that proposed this, I mean
foundation for the Boolean
algebra here, where I'll go to
minimize minimize the Boolean.
Expression even N variables.
So let's have a look at this
algorithm, so I put a link here
for this algorithm.
Ah, let's go to this.
algorithm.
Just do. You can use this link
to make sure that you are doing
right. For the.
For your I mean questions.
So as you can see here in this
link, you can pick the number of
variables, for instance three.
I'll explain why don't care
right now, so imagine these are
the minterms with one.
As you choose those min terms,
that makes the I mean after one
or y. So you see, in the
bottom the minimize Boolean
expression. This is the symbol
for OR and.
For the AND doesn't have any
operators, so you can see the
minimized Boolean expression.
Using this demo you can change
to 8 variables and then.
Just select the Boolean
expression in minterm
mix it and then finally you
see the minimize Boolean expression.
So let's move on to
the next topic, which
is about don't care.
All in practice. So again, for
the N variables, we can use the
Queen Mac Bossy algorithm to
minimize the Boolean expression.
But one thing happens in
practice is this don't care
conditions in practice.
Sometimes you don't know the,
uh. Output of Boolean function
is on the value of the input
variables. Or you know that, but
you don't care about the output,
so let's see an example of that.
Imagine you are given this
Boolean a. This question says
that you have to create a truth
table or you have to design A
logic circuit based on this
definition. If the input is
positive, then one otherwise 0.
and, you're given three input
binary variables, so assume that
I mean you are in the sign
magnitude system, or in the twos
complement for this question
doesn't matter. Because as you
know, in the binary numbers
two s complements system and the
sign magnitude system, the last
digit kind of acting as a sign.
I already knew that in a lecture
assignments. So for instance, the first
number is 0.
This is gonna be a 0 is
not positive, is not
negative, so we cannot
consider this zero
positive. So the else is
zero it becomes 0.
This one one the sign integer,
is a zero. the sign position is 0,
so this is positive. One this is
positive 2 positive 3.
So these numbers are positive
for the zero. We said that there
is not positive also else.
The output gonna
be 0. This one is.
Minus 3 IN twos complements in
sign magnitude system. It is
minus 0. So again, we cannot
consider this as a zero. It
doesn't have any sign, so we can
say that else is 0.
This is a in 2's complement.
This is minus 2.
In the sign magnitude again, this
is minus one because if in the
sign magnitude this is sign, so
this is 1, so it becomes minus
one. And etc. So as long as they
are positive, you output one at
longer else. Be out there.
And this is the Boolean
function in terms of some of
minterms and sum  products of
Maxterms. So in the product of maxterms
we put the maxterms 0.
And if you simplify this by the
Karnaugh map, it becomes for this.
output of these two shared region.
Overlapping regions, and this is
the. Minimize version.
By using the product of maxterms
you can see that these are the
regions or the product of the
maxterms so. Add minimize a
sum of minterm followed by the not.
What if we change the
question to this if
positive, one if negative 0?
What happens to the terms
that makes if the number
is neither zero, neither
positive nor negative?
for instance 0 here. In the input,
gathered Zero and we consider 0 as
a number which is not negative,
which is not positive. So what
happens to this?
You said that we don't know the
value 'cause the question says
that if it is positive one if it
is negative 0. But for this
number we don't know.
What output would you have to put
for the Boolean function F?
If you are in the sign magnitude
system, you have to do the same
here in the sign magnitude. You
say that this is minus zero, but
for this zero we don't put a
sign. We assume 0 as a number
which is not positive, which is
not negative. So you don't know
what output would you have to put.
So this is happening in the
practice or because of the I
mean, the question actually
doesn't specify the output. So
in this question we say that the
Boolean function has some output
that we don't care.
we like called these I mean uh
outputs which is either unknown
or which is known, but we don't
care about the value. Don't care
conditions and we put it like
this, so these are the minterms
with one. These are the minterms
with zero and this sells. That
doesn't mean we don't care about
the value or it is unknown or it
is ambiguous. Just put this.
I will say that this is it don't
care condition in the minterm 0.
What's the usage of a don't
care? The thing is, whenever
there is a don't care in a
practice in a design, the
question doesn't say as what is
the output because we said that
this is the don't care condition
we we can assume that.
It is 1 because it helps
us to create a bigger
region and simplify the
Boolean function better.
So although the output we don't
care about the output but but
because it helps us to form a
minimum version of the function
can assume that the output is 1.
So they don't care.
Becomes a min term with
value one.
And it helps us with the
better simplification.
I feel going to write the
Boolean function using the
maxterm, so this is the maxterm.
And we have it. Don't care with
capital D. The same cell we
don't care about the output, but
we can say that if it is zero,
let's see it helps with better
simplification or not.
So if we assume this cell as a
zero, we have two.
Shared region.
First one is.
As before. Z or Z in
this row Z must be one, but
this shared region we have Z
doesn't matter. We have x'
Y' followed by the not.
So and then, if you bring the
not inside, it becomes like
this. But here you see that
include assuming the don't care
condition 0 doesn't help us with
more simplification. So
we can simply just leave
it as don't care and we
don't assume this is 0.
So for the don't care, we say
that the Boolean function is
called incomplete specified
function. It means there are
some output cells at the value
actually is unknown, is or
incomplete either. The question
actually is limited. The
question doesn't say what what
is going to be in the output or
we intentionally assume that
there isn't the value of the
output doesn't, I mean.
Actually, is not important.
These, I mean cells or these
minterms become the don't care
condition and sometimes it helps
us with the more simplification.
So we can assume they are either
one or they are either 0.
Because these are a unknown
values or these are the don't
care conditions in the Karnaugh
map. In general, we put an X.
This is not a binary variable.
This is just X plus. Cross could
say that this is across so in
the Karnaugh map for those cells
that we don't care that out or
this is unknown.
I just put on Cross or X here so
this X is different from this
binary variable and just to show
you that just to show that this
cell the value is either one or
zero doesn't? We don't care
about the value.
And sometimes they don't care.
Conditions help us get better
simplification. So when we are
doing work trying to simplify
using the sum of min terms, we
can assume they are one.
If you are simplifying with the
product of the maxterm then we can
assume they are zero and then
see whether they help with the
more simplification or not.
So. We are done with the
third chapter and next lecture
we're gonna start the 4th
chapter, which is the
combination logic. So for
now I'm ready for your question.
Any questions?
I can see a question from Marco.
Can you assume it?
It is a.
ZE.
Oh cool, OK, thank you.
Any other questions?
Going to be considered
always based on the
simplification or always as
one.
This is just for simplification,
so you should not assume the
don't care condition one.
Also, you should not consider
the don't care condition 0.
So they don't take condition
that that's why we put the
X here. They don't care
condition, we just simply
don't care about it up.
Whenever we are trying to
simplify if Boolean function
and if we assume they are
one, it helps us. We can
assume they are one.
Whenever we are trying to, I
mean from simplify a product
of maxterms and. If you assume
there are zero, it helps us
with more simplification. We
can assume there are zero, so
it's kind of an assumption.
So the value of don't care
condition might be one might
be 0 based on our application
of the simplification.
So they don't care, value is
unknown. They are not one.
They are not one they are not zero, but in the
process simplification we
could assume they are one. Or
we could assume there are zero
in order to help us with the
better simplification.
Next week we're gonna see
some more example of this. I
don't care condition in
simplification.
But just for the
simplification, we can assume
there are one or zero. But I
mean in general don't care.
Or they are not. The value
actually is unknown.
Any other questions?
So I'm going to be in the office
hour, so if you have any
questions regarding the vector
assignments, minterm exam, or
any other issue in the course,
I'm happy to take your questions
an address your issues. Thank
you. How great day.